Title: Open Sesame?
Date: 2012-01-01 01:18
Tags: biometrics, passwords, technology
Slug: open-sesame

Well its been ages since I wrote a blog post and this thought has been
on my mind for a long time. Passwords. What the hell? 

I don’t know when “Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves” is supposed to take
place, but it was a *long time ago*. What does it say about us that we
are using *exactly* the same authentication system thousands of years
later?

![][]

Passwords are just archaic. They are pretty poor performers at both ends
of what they are supposed to do. For intended users, they are
inconvenient because they are so easy to forget. For intruders, they are
usually remarkably easy to guess or otherwise acquire. *Especially* with
the brute force afforded these intruders by modern technology.

I find it shocking that in all of human history we hadn’t devised
anything better until biometrics came about. Equally shocking is that we
still haven’t made the switch to biometrics as a society. I wonder how
much money is lost each year due to issues that could have been avoided
with a better authentication system.

![][1]

I’m going to brainstorm alternative paradigms that could have been
implemented in between passwords and biometrics- I’ll post here if and
when I think of any.  Leave a comment (does this blog have a
readership?) if you can think of one. Also leave a comment if you know
why the adoption of biometrics has been so slow.

This makes me wonder- what other systems are we living with that were
designed for an ancient world that we no longer live in…

EDIT: I posted this exact question to Quora, and received a TON of
profound answers. [Check it out here!][] (33 answers and counting! Plus
it got “best-sourced”).

  []: http://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lx3if8FDIG1r0kwho.jpg
  [1]: http://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lx3ifmIQHT1r0kwho.jpg
  [Check it out here!]: http://www.quora.com/What-are-some-systems-we-live-with-today-that-were-designed-for-a-world-of-the-past
