Title: Science: the art and arborization of knowledge
Date: 2011-10-06 06:27
Tags: humanities, paradigm, philosophy, science
Slug: science-the-art-and-arborization-of-knowledge

I often find it odd that people tend to think of “science” as being
somehow classified exclusively from “humanities.” Somehow things like
literature, history, and philosophy become the study of the human
condition while science becomes simply technobabble ruled by equations
and esoteric to the point of being completely inaccesible to anyone that
hasn’t spent their life chiseling away at their little block of science.

But in this era of scientific ultra-specialization, its easy to lose
sight of the fact that there is nothing more fundamentally human.
Science isn’t a set of equations, the latest MRI scanner, deep-space
telescope, or vat of chemicals. In its purest essence, science is a way
for us to discover what *is.* Actually, it’s the *only* way for us to
explore truth. There is no other tool available to us- which is why
science strikes me as the fundamental study of the human condition and
our place in the universe.

In this respect, science is *simple.*Its interesting to note that most
of the pivotal, truly *insightful*revelations that scientists have
dreamed up are so basic a child can understand them immediately. Take,
for example, Darwin’s theory of evolution. This is (only somewhat)
arguably the most important and unifying principle in all of biology
(and perhaps the physical sciences as well, see: [Lee Cronin][]), but it
barely requires an ounce more knowledge than what is plainly available
to everyone. Okay, well it did take some island hopping and careful
observations, but now that the insight is made, its intuitive. Science
is a way of looking at the way things are and gaining both incredible
power and profound meaning from it.

Similarly, while Einstein’s theories of relativity may seem stymying and
even intimidating, whats truly amazing is that the conclusions they draw
can be (and originally were!) arrived at purely on the basis of thought
experiments! Think about that. SImply by changing the way that we
*conceive* of the things we experience, we can create understanding
where there was once nothing.

Do these kinds of insights still happen in science? Sometimes if feels
like there’s no way we will make comparable discoveries in our lifetime.
Surely we aren’t still missing something as big and far-reaching as
evolution or E=mc\^2… Brain science is one of the few fields of inquiry
left in which such a paradigm shift can be made. Its my belief that the
seemingly intractable problems of consciousness- of what “we” and our
subjective experiences even *are-*can and will be enlightened by
science. Like evolution and relativity, all it requires is the right way
of looking at the issue.

Of course, its entirely neuro-chauvinistic of me to make such a special
claim about the brain. After all, we don’t know what we don’t know, and
thats why we have science.

  [Lee Cronin]: http://www.ted.com/talks/lee_cronin_making_matter_come_alive.html
